Original transcriptInterviewer:  That is all going head. Okay, so we'll start by me understanding a bit more about your son. What's his name?P09:  His name is Neil.Interviewer:  Excellent. And how old is Neil at the moment?P09:  Four years and something. I don't know - he was born on the 24th of july of 2014, so four years and something.Interviewer:  And when did you find out that Neil had EEF1A2?P09:  Erm it was, erm, in June last year.Interviewer:  Okay. And can you tell me a bit about your experience of getting a diagnosis?P09:  When we found out about the diagnosis you mean? [Interviewer: Yeah, yeah] Okay. I mean, well, we were aware that something was going on since he was six months old, because he was having some fits, some seizures. So. And by that time, we were living in the [location information], and we fly back to Spain, because we are from Spain, because we really, you know, I want to understand every single part of the illness that our son has, and it was difficult. It is difficult for me to understand something in Spanish. So in another language, I mean, it's not your natural language. So we were we fly to Spain and new was eight months or something like that. And I mean, and it has been, it has been a fight to we get the diagnosis. I mean, we know that something was going on, because he - all his like - the milestones were like a little bit late, but you know, they are babies, so you don't know.... And he is my first child, so... you know something is not okay... but you never know: "Okay, but this is serious" or  "Oh, it's not serious." So we move here. And Neil and I moved to South Africa, we, of course, find a neurologist here in Johannesburg and she told us "Let's do the complete exome sequencing" (I don't know... I can send you the information if you want) [She said it was] the complete I mean - everything, "if anything genetic is here it will appear here" And after two days or something like that (and they sent it overseas to Germany) and in two days they called us and said "can you please come in and I will try to explain it to you. Because there's just a few, few cases in the in the whole world. But I'm gonna tell you what I know." Yeah. So... and this was June last year. And... we were okay till that time. But I have to tell you - some of the parents get 'relief', kind of, when when they get the diagnosis. In my personal case, it was just the opposite. [Interviewer: right, yeah] the opposite - it was just "This is serious." I mean... erm, now we have the diagnosis and we don't know anything else. We know that erm, some of the kids that have the diagnosis have little symptoms and some cases are super severe. And then some cases are not that severe. And, but we didn't have any more... I mean, we didn't have at that time, the Facebook page, where I learned about - where all the parents can talk about their, about their kids and all of this. We didn't have the support. And that was for me when I just... break: "Okay, this is serious. This is is gonna be forever." And that was my... I mean, that was the moment that I, like, face reality. [Interviewer: Right.] You know? [Interviewer: Yeah]. I mean, it was not really at all relieving [laughter] I can imagine that people [finding out] after 10 years feel some relief. "Okay, I'm looking for this and I don't know what's going on and this is going on." But you know? It doesn't have a name [emphasis]. I mean... so it's like okay this is going on but... hmm. We don't... I feel things about it but not much.Interviewer:  Did you react differently to your partner?P09:  I mean, you know, he's a man [laughter] I think there are a lot of men like that. It's not like, they don't face it. But they keep it for themselves, you know? And, and it's difficult. And then one day, for just a silly thing, they [the child with EEF1A2] make a meltdown and you think "what is going on? Oh, okay. Maybe it's his time to, you know, to break this" or something like that. For example, um, my kid is in a special school now. [Interviewer: Ok, yep.] And we meet once a month with all the mums that want to take part. [Interviewer: Yeah.] And it's been really helpful. And he [the partner] doesn't have this space, you know, and I'm sure he doesn't talk with his friends about Neil's issues - of course his friends are like 'how is Neil? / 'How is everything?' but I'm not sure if he opens up about what's on his mind. I'm not sure - I don't think so, in fact, because I was the one that told all his family what was going on so...Interviewer:  Right, yeah. So could you tell me a bit more about you and your emotional response to finding out about erm, your child's condition?P09:  It has been...  I mean, it's like "we're not going back" and I know that my boy will be sick forever... it's not like something like "okay, nah, he's sick but maybe if you do this and you do that" maybe, maybe he gets better Of course he can do [emphasis] better: we can control his experience and I mean he has good times and he has been great for a year, trying to walk like crazy, trying to communicate a lot more and then I'm sure there will be some like, some months or whatever where he will be a stuck on something and not willing to work or talk or whatever but erm, I mean, I have had that conversation, but I could not - I mean, I was crying all the time.I don't know if she understood anything that I told her [laughing] but that's okay. It was like it was, erm... It took us like six months to tell the family what was going on? [Interviewer: Yeah] because you know, you're not enough.. I mean, you cannot talk to them directly. Yeah, so we prefer to to tell them in person. Yeah, so we use Christmas last year to communicate everything - I don't know if they... I mean some of the family,  think they understood, and they are researching and all of this - some of them I think they avoid that... but I mean it's part of life. I mean, when they are ready, they can ask us what they want and and everything...So it was like six months which was really hard because it's not... I don't want to tell you... it's tough at first I needed to understand it as fully as I could so I could be like "okay this is my reality now". I needed to understand the implications of his illness for my myself first and be able to explain it without... breaking down every time I have this topic with friends and familyBut after that I think, I don't know, I mean I think I just carry on. I mean it's, you know, there's so many things to do as a mum [Interviewer: Yeah] especially when you have a special kid. So it's just, erm, I talk to the mums "No, I'm not taking my kids to birthday parties because it's a drama for everyone." And okay: my vision is - and maybe it's easy  because I only have one child - "I took to the kid to the birthday, if it's not today I'm going home: It's ok. I will try the next birthday" you know. And that's my philosophy. I think sometimes it can be like a perfect birthday afternoon something but I mean there are a lot of things going on with the other children who do not have any neurological problem as well. They also have drama, they also have meltdowns. I mean all of us have to deal with things that we cannot control and this is one of mine so I just - I just want him to be as happy as he can. And that's really the that's why it matters to me. So yeah.Interviewer:  Can you tell me about one particular moment say, in the last month or so, that's been a particularly good day for him? [P09: Erm...] it doesn't have to be in the last month but I'm just thinking about what makes a good day and what makes it difficult day.P09:  I mean, I mean, thank God, he has a lot of good days. I mean as you know he has fits and they are not controlled at this moment. So if he has a fit for me it's not a good day. It doesn't matter how tiny they are or how long they are, I mean, if if he has a fit - for me, because I know that he's really suffering - so, it cannot be a good thing. But thank God. Erm, emotionally, and I think... he normally has good days. Yeah. I mean yesterday and slept really nice at night - that's a big issue for all these sorts of kids - so he had a good night to sleep so he was okay at school (he doesn't like to go to school at all - he is so lazy! [laughing]) but he had a good day yesterday and then we went to the park and he was helping me with a garden... yesterday it was really good time.P09:  It's not a good time when he is tired, basically, and when he cannot communicate what he wants. He gets so frustrated [Interviewer: yeah] but I mean - like a baby, like when he's one year old, okay mine is four years old okay and he should be able to tell me what's going on and he cannot do it always but I mean that is when you say okay nothing that I do or nothing or there is nothing I can say that's going to help here.P09:  But I do suffer for him because you know that he is not this way... he's not a cranky old lady, something is going on but he's not able to communicate what's going on so...Interviewer:  Yeah. You said that about his fits - is that what you find personally most difficult?P09:  It is for me because - you know, my my friends laugh at me, okay, because I mean I have my phone in my hand when I'm not with him -  I told my my husband and my friends "don't call me if Neil is at the school" because I think in the worst, you know, so so I have it and when when he is he's with me, I forget about the phone. He is not- because I know how to react and the teachers more or less have know how to react but the thing is that I feel.... that if I'm not there when he's having the seizure, you know, I know that they are not... that he is not aware, maybe, especially if it's a big one ... so he won't miss mommy in the moment. You know I prefer that, if he he has that fit at home when he is with me with me, in a quiet place, you know, so I don't know... I'm not a doctor so I don't know how to do I deal with it like... like you professionals do, I don't know, you know, I'm his mum.Interviewer:  Yeah, yeah. And say he's at a school at the moment  - what sort of support does he get school?P09:  He, erm, we moved him to - originally he had to go to a really, really small Montessori - then we moved him to a special school. And in there, you know, depth that they do social bootlegging and then they mix with it much colours on ABC and D sort of things he is not fully  there yet, he's trying to matching colors but but it's not - nowadays they are focusing more on Neil's behavior. You know? Because he, he's not interested in playing with other kids. I mean, kids are very social with others, like very social. And he kisses everyone and hugs everyone and he does perfect eye contact - if he likes something, he's gonna share it with you, and me and all the people in the room... so... he has some autistic features - like his way of playing, he prefers to throw things instead of like, doing the figurative playing.P09:  He is beginning to do that now - like he can roll an apple or a car, erm, he can talk to erm, some piece of wood or something as if it was a cell phone or whatever - he's beginning to do that, but but we are focusing be able to sit with kids and be sensible with no drama [laughs] and with not trying to push anyone.P09:  And this year it has been all about that like "don't try to push when a kid trying to share something with you", basically. [Interviewer: yeah, Ok.] and then all of the school he goes three times to shutter up is a week she goes during summer to hydrotherapy in a swimming pool he has two times of his speech a week on three times or, or two. Okay, but all of these after like after school… and especially my kids he works a lot better with the therapist than with me.Interviewer:  Yeah, yeah. And what do you think you would have liked to have known about earlier? So he's got he's having this physiotherapy now and he's having these different sorts of support…P09:  He has been, I mean, we didn't know what was going on but he was having his therapies [Interviewer: okay yeah] so as soon we, as soon as we fly to Spain [Interviewer: yeah] and we see okay something is going on and it's not just a fit and we will put him into physiotherapy and no OT at that time, no OT, he began to do this when he was 8 months -er, physiotherapy and OT in Spain, and when when he came and was one year old and we put him into speech therapy as well.So he began the therapies really early. We were we were not aware of what was going on but he began to do therapy as soon as we knew that something was wrong. So I mean it was not such a difference because the treatment is the same, I mean the same [emphasis]. Our neurologists told us "okay this is symptomatic, we have to treat the fits" as otherwise it may cause more damage in his brain or whatever but this kid needs to work - I don't mind what is exactly going on but he has to work. So, so, we begin to that as soon as we as soon as we were in Spain.Interviewer:  Yeah, ok. So, I'm going to think more about sort of the future now: what sort of worries do you have personally about the future in relation to Neil?P09:  I mean, of course, what worries me most is because he is my only child. So if something happened to me or my husband, what is he gonna do? I mean, we have family - of course, you have family - but it's I think it's difficult to leave a child that doesn't have any problem for my mom, because she's old or whatever, or my brother or whatever. Especially, I mean, we are here in South Africa because it's easy for us to treat Neil, it seems like a strange but here we can afford to give him anything that he needs. And in Spain, some of the treatment is paid by the government. But we were not getting all that Neil, needs.I mean, we got like one physiotherapy [session] a week. But it's not what he's having here. And I mean, there's a lot of cost, in everything that you do with it with a special kid. And it's not only the care that Neil needs - It's all the cost that comes behind, for him to be able to be more independent, you know? [Interviewer: yeah] so we talked to that lady that she is, I think, from UK, but I'm not sure where I didn't know if it's UK, your or..[Interviewer: is this [name of researcher] or...?] no, it's one mom, she's in that group [facebook support group] as well. And she told me that her daughter, she's 30 years old, so she's one of the oldest of the group. And she told us that she lives independently. And it's like she's four years old, more or less, but he lives in a community with with other disabled people, but also there are therapies that they live nearby. And all of these, so they have the support they have the help - and was a huge thing for us. I mean, our like, you know, trying to, to visualize your son. Okay, maybe this can happen. Maybe he will be kind of independent - and not for me, of course, I will, I will have at home forever, I mean, I still sleep with him - but for him to to to try to be the more independent that... that he can be, you know? Interviewer:  And how do you find that other people's reactions to him? Do you think there needs to be more awareness about his condition? P09:  Yeah, I mean, I go to a supermarket and as I tell you, it's not like - I have a lot of friends here because kids with down syndrome, for example, and Okay, if that kid acts kind of strange, okay it's like "Ok, he's Down syndrome, it's ok" But my kid me his face is just ... a regular face. I mean, I mean, so when I go to the supermarket and he's had a big meltdown it's all "Oh, what a child, what a mum..." ... I mean, sometimes - I normally say nothing - because they I mean, they are not my friends. They don't need any explanation. That's ... but you know, I carry my child because when he is tired, he is not able to walk and I get "This kid should be walking!" and I mean.... Okay. Really? I mean,  I mean, it's difficult...I think all of us, we don't need to judge the other one. I mean, all, all things in life. I mean, you don't know what these mom or these kids is going on. So I mean, that's, that's a difficult bar, because as I told you, he doesn't have anything, they just think, "Oh, this kid - he is a mummy's kid or whatever and he's not a poor baby." I mean, maybe I shouldn't be... But I mean, it's something going on in his brain. Not like - he doesn't need more education or something. No. It's just ... just difficult for him to be in a supermarket with all the voices with all the sounds with all, you know, these sorts of things.. it would be easier if people were just more... empathetic. Interviewer:  Ok, I've actually got to the end of my questions, Catherine, but is is there anything you want to talk more about that we've discussed or anything that you feel like we haven't had the chance to discuss?P09  With the public system in spain you see a lot of psychologists and I think it's a lot better organized than South Africa, for sure. Because South Africa is a great country but then in several things ... maybe in Europe in general, we're step, a little step, forward than here. And at that time [the time around the child's diagnosis] we had just arrived here, and course we have some psychological erm support from our families and my husband and I just look at each other and say "no, that's not gonna happen to to us" and because they want to help you know? But at that time we didn't know, I mean, we knew that something was going on but we didn't... I mean we didn't really think about what it could be and at the time, we look at our child and thought we don't really need it.. I mean keep your head for the people that really need it. I know last year I always remembered I had a phrase for six months that was like "okay, maybe now I need that help" [laughter] and the only reason I didn't ask for help it was because I was not in Spain, because you know it's super difficult for me, because they told me I know some, some psychologists, here you know, but for me it was a lot easier if I can speak my mind in Spanish than in English [Interviewer yes yeah] so that was my only reason...  in fact I have a wonderful friend, she's a psychologist, and she told me, I mean of course,  "I cannot do that because I know you very well, but I can give you the phone of some of my colleagues and you can Skype with them" - I mean, it's not the best thing to do because you really need to see that person and that person needs to see you. But I mean, I truly I don't think I didn't need it anymore. Thankfully I have a lot of friends here and I have a lot of support erm but at that time I really thought that if I was in a Spain, I would ask for help, for sure.Interviewer  I guess it's something that is an option for the future if you find things more difficultP09  Yeah of course of course, when when the psychologists told me about it and at time I really I thought that if I didn't need it. I mean, ok, I mean I was fighting for my time but but I was I was really okay and I think really my husband was also okay at that time as well so... but if I am sure if in the future I need some help I definitely will ask for help, I'm sure. But not only for me, because for, for him because you know if I'm not okay then Neil is not okay - in fact when I'm more nervous, when I have a lot of work to do and I cannot pay attention, Neil is... I mean that week is horrible for me.... having more fits or being more nervous and having less sleep.. so what I got all of this is if I'm ok we can have more chances to be OK, you know? It depends on me I mean I'm 24 seven with him, his father travels a lot, I'm here by myself, so his support is his mummy. if I'm nervous then he suffers a lot, a lot, I mean, more than I want hm to. Sometimes I'm nervous becaeuse I have to do something for work, but I try to breathe and tell myself "Okay, you can be nervous till you go to fetch Neil at the school and then, you know, after that you cannot be nervous" because I told I told the neurologists I mean she was having shifts just when I have my my period I mean that the day before and he told me that makes no sense. I mean, I talked him the end of each month he's more willing to have sheets ways that there's no need for that and I told you Okay, and I'm having a period about the 20 that makes sense for you. Okay, if you ever more nervous he was so that was okay. My my goal I have to be quiet. Not for me. But for for Neil. I mean, if my behaviour can affect my time so much. I mean, I have to be an adult here and I have to cut this off because he's healthy, you know? Interviewer:  One more question I'd like to ask is what would you like parents in similar situations and in the future to know have access to?P09L  It was different in Spain and in America because I was in a really really tiny small small town in Nevada in the middle of the desert and there's no feature tab is there's no neurology is that none I mean and I had to go to the neurologist to Las Vegas that it was a three hours apart from where I live so I don't know if it was like if I was still living there if Neil had all that support do soon I mean of course if I know that something is wrong with she's one day all I will do the things that I could but I think we began to work really at MIT because someone in Spain tall as the neurologists tell us okay we will definitely look for a diagnosis for to this kid but he has to work yeah i mean that we can control the fits we can try to control the fits but I mean it's as important.And that's that's my concern - maybe there are people that live in small towns like mine that they go once a month to the neurologist but the kids are not getting the attention that they need and I mean... that's that's the main issue I mean.it definitely not about what they have or what they don't have -  they need to have that support. Because it's a it's amazing, I mean last year it was amazing, Neil, I don't know he was he was not having any fits,  so his development was amazing, I mean amazing I couldn't ask for more and this is because it's good - you don't see every day that okay he's working one hour every day when this is over but maybe you are not seeing each day and then if you see you keep walking around when  no one asked him him to walk and it's like oh this is because he has been working since he was eight months old. Come on. It's very a big difference and and of course the medical thing it's super important but for me therapies it's, I mean, they're important. Interviewer:  Right, because it's about supporting him as an individualP09:  Yes yes. It's something like, erm, telling him "Ok, Neil, okay this car is not for throwing, it's just for playing, like the real the cars, you know?" I mean other kids know this  I mean, they copy the other one but there are some things that you have to teach every single thing and I mean - we are that. They learn a lot from us, but especially as we're not therapists - I would love to be a therapist or neurologist so I can understand better my kid - I mean we need help, we need help. And especially my kid he works a lot better with the therapist than me that with me I mean - he can draw, he can draw something very nice at a school but  not with me! [laughing] with me he says wanna dance and he definitely don't want to do a painting!Interviewer :thank you so much for sharing your experiences with me Jane. And is there anything else you wanted to talk about?P09  Thank you very much. No, um, my husband really wanted to talk to you. But he was traveling the whole week. And he told me "Okay, please tell Eleanor that I'm sorry." But it has been really really really tough week. Interviewer:  No, tell him not to worry at all. You know, even - it sounds silly - but even filling out the surveys really, really helpful because it just gives people more information. [P09: I'm glad, anything that you need] so thank you so much for your time. [P09: Anything that you need, you have our email addresses and our phones, so anything that you need]And likewise, feel free to contact me if you have any more questions about this study or anything.P09:  Thank you very much. Thank you.Interviewer:  Thank you. Bye, bye.