Original transcriptInterviewer:  Erm, Ok I think that's all going ahead. Okay, Sarah. So we'll start by me understanding a bit more about your daughter. What's her name?P16:  [muffled audio] Sorry what's her name? [Interviewer: Yeah, what's her name?] Her name is Emma.Interviewer:  That's fine. Is it okay if I call her Emma throughout this?P16:  Of course, yeah.Interviewer:  And how old is Emma at the moment?P16:  She's seven - seven and a half.Interviewer:  Okay and when did you receive news that she was diagnosed with EEF1A2?P16:  January 17th - so last January.Interviewer:  Ok, so how old was Emma then?P16:  She would have been six.Interviewer:  Ok. And can you tell me a bit about your experience of getting that diagnosis?P16:  Erm, initially we really wanted a diagnosis for her, when she was little. That wavered, quite a lot as she got older - and I'll be honest when we got the diagnosis we hadn't expected to get one - so it did come up quite a shock. [Interviewer: yeah] Erm... we really had begun to accept that she probably wouldn't get a diagnosis because we thought that her symptoms were probably caused from a difficult pregnancy - and a very difficult labour - so we suspected she might get a cerebal palsy diagnosis at some point, erm. So... it did come as a shock to us. And erm... after the dust had settled, we realised that actually - it hadn't changed anything, really, you know? [Interviewer: yeah] There was no prognosis, erm, there was no sort of information of 'this could happen, that could happen, this is her path' sort of thing. So I think we realised that, once the dust had settled, that not a lot had changed. Erm, yeah, so it's a funny one really. It didn't really... in the long term it hasn't really changed anything I don't think. But I suppose we're getting another level of support. Like, having this conversation with you now, and we are in touch with a few of the parents. So I suppose, like there have been like changes in the big picture it hasn't made much of a difference, certainly not to Emma, you know she's the same as she was before then.Interviewer:  Yeah - you said the word shock there, can you expand a bit more about what you meant by the word shock?P16:  Erm [sigh] I think there was the shock in the fact that there was something genetically wrong with her. I think, ah, as a mother and that maybe in my mind I thought that something had gone wrong in the pregnancy. I don't think it was as much as I blamed myself, but I thought that something had gone wrong. I felt like I'd had a healthy baby and then something had gone wrong - so I think that's, for me personally, where the shock came from. Erm, that I.... I think I felt a bit sad as well, that she was always going be this way, I think, you know that I felt that something had gone wrong... so that was probably my shock.And also... the shock that it's something so rare [Interviewer: yep] or something so new, maybe. Because all, you know, there could be lots of children who have had it in the past, we don't know do we, we had to find it. We also, erm, we're quite close with the Rett community [Interviewer: yep] so i'm part of the Rett group [facebook support group] so I quite often find support in that community and I can offer them support and so... to sort of find that we were definitely not in the Rett group, that was a bit of a shock as well. [Interviewer: yeah] I think it's just - it doesn't matter how much you prepare yourself for a possible label... when it comes, it's a shock and because of the way the study - the DDD study - works, we've been on it for such a long time, you almost put it in the back of your mind, you know? [Interviewer: hmm, hmm, yeah] I just think, yeah, from a maternal point of view... I think I thought there was some sort of internal thing going on with me where... I felt that I'd had a healthy baby up until about 20 weeks and then I had, I had a leak in my waters [Interviewer: [Gently] Right] and then everything went downhill from then I spent my whole, up until that point, believing that something had happened at that point, because I'd had such a great pregnancy up until that point and then it just went from bad to worse... I was on crutches and Emma's heart rate was constantly dropping every time for my appointments... I was being monitored for a long, long time. And every midwife checkup I was being taken into hospital and they would put me on a monitor for two, three, four hours - because her heart rate kept dipping, and prior to that, you know, nothing had been going on... so I'd always felt that that water leak that I'd had, that we'd been told was nothing to worry about, but then a subsequent number of events happened afterwards - I was convinced that something had happened to her, that she'd had a fit or a stroke or something, inside me and that that's why she'd had the problems she had. So I think, personally, for me, the shock came from like: "Oh wow. She's was always going to be this way, that's her story" you know what I mean?Interviewer:  That it was nothing to do with your pregnancy? P16:  Exactly, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And all those other things... were just unfortunate, really.Interviewer:  Yes, yeah. So you used the word blame earlier - did the diagnosis alleviate some of that?P16:  I think it did. I think it did. But I think that... I'll always look back at the things that happened before I conceived Emma, you know, drink - you know, you're always going to do that. I had a bit of a car-accident, when I'd just got pregnant and you know you think, oh no, did that jolt, that shock did that cause something? You know? And I've even had a conversation with a friend who's actually a very intelligent friend and I said "I wonder if the gene that was forming when I had that accident, and it was affected by the accident" and she said "no, it's a natural - that genetic process was always going to happen, it can't be knocked or changed" you know, erm, and that reassured me... yeah so I think the blame was definitely alleviated but as a mother to a child who has so many challenges that there will always be an element of... yeah, yeah. I think, the thing that did make me feel better was the fact that neither [partner's name] or I were carriers [Interviewer:: Right, yes] That, that, that - for us - and not just for me and my husband but for our son [Interviewer:: Yeah]. You know, I'm from a big family, so to be able to say to all of our nephews and nieces: "It's OK" you know, this is not something that's lurking in our genetic makeup so I think that part was very, very comforting for us...Interviewer:  That Emma's an individual but it's not something in your genetic makeup.P16:  That's right, yeah. And for our son, you know, he's six... but one day, God-willing, that he will be in a position where he wants a family... and to be able to say to him, you know, that this is fine, it's not going to happen again and you've got as much chance as anyone else, you know, because that's a big thing isn't it, you know?Interviewer:  Ok. So let's turn our attention to what's going on in your life at the moment? What would you call a good day for you and Emma, say, last week? [Pause] I know that's a bit of a weird question, I'm trying to give a timeframe to make it easier, but I just mean, you'll Emma's primary care aren't you? [P16: Yeah, I am yeah ] So, um, what would you call a sort of good day for Emma? Or um, maybe a better example would be what's been a good experience in the last week or so in the last month?P16:  Yeah, yeah. It certainly comes down to moods for us. Can you hear me alright? [Interviewer: yeah] yeah it certainly comes down to moods. Literally, if Emma is in a good mood, sorry [travelling through a tunnel] can you hear me?Interviewer:  Yeah, I can hear you now. perfectly. Yeah.P16:  Yeah so for us, really, quite simply, if Emma is in a good mood and she's engaged and she's happy - you know, she's alert - that, for us, is just so easy and is a good day for us... when she's engaging with us and is in a good place that's when we're like a normal family. It just feels like a normal family, it really does.Interviewer:  And how is her interaction with your son?P16:  Uh she adores him. She keeps eye contact and she smiles. She likes to be near him, she likes him to talk to her- it's the best thing ever for her, it really is.Interviewer:  And can you an example in the last week of a more difficult time?P16:  Yeah, uh, so the main thing for us is eye contact and our question is why - is she unwell? is she ill? is she tired? Is she fed up? Has something happened? - you know it's all these questions... so uh, we just had a day recently where she was very withdrawn, reduced eye contact, lots of repetitive noises like a moaning noise and in these instances she waves her hands in front of her face and that's all she interested in - she'll just focus on her hands. Normally she's not bothered about eating, so it's those days where, you know, she's clearly not on form and you know we don't know why. And those days are incredibly hard - my husband copes better, you know because he's at work, so he'll come in and just treat her as normal, but I find it really hard and I have to really force myself to continue to interact with her because you don't get anything back. And these days come, maybe once a week? Sometimes you can figure out what's wrong and think 'oh yeah, it's that' and you can sort it out and it's fine - and others... it's just comes and goes and you never know to be honestInterviewer:  Okay so on the days like this where she's not interacting as much, or maybe just not able to communicate her needs, how is it? You're saying that it's difficult - could you expand on how it's making you feel in those moments?P16:  [Sigh] I find it... extremely sad. Frustrating. Erm, I get angry - not at her, never at her - but you know at the whole situation...I think I feel quite trapped on those days because you don't really know, you know - do you send her to school or do you keep her at home? If I send her to school she might be better... if I keep her at home, she might be more relaxed but she might be bored... you know it's... do you go out for the day? Do you see friends? It's very - it can control [emphasis] everything because you just don't know what's going on and you don't know whether you're going to make her better or worse [Interviewer: yeah, yeah] .... so yeah I can get angry... I think it makes me feel... that things are worse than I thought, do you know what I mean? And like I said on the days where she's good you can just carry on like a normal family and then I then think on days that are bad just 'oh my God this is just the worst that it could possibly be' you know she's so disabled, she's never going to get any better... I think you know, your emotions just flip so much and I think that's possibly why I find it so much harder than my husband because I think, you know, that he's just a bit more black and white maybe? And just a bit more 'oh, it's a bad day, she'll be fine' you know?Interviewer:  And maybe that's because you're seeing very much the day-to-day experience.P16:  Yeah. yeah, and I'm the main caregiver so...Interviewer:  You mentioned school there. Erm, do you get any support from school?P16:  Yeah Emma is in a specialist school, only recently because she started school in January this year, well not that recently now, truth be told Emma has had a bit of a rocky road with school and then that basically didn't really work either and it all just got worse and worse and the inclusion is just really bad, so we withdrew her from the class in September and then enrolled her into the new school in January and it has done so much, because before she was withdrawn and anxious and she's spent quite a lot of time at home and we've done a lot of private tuition but now she's at a special-needs school, so she was in mainstream before and it's made such a difference. It's a special needs school in [location information] it's a beautiful little school, she goes full-time, Monday-Friday and it's fantastic for her, but it's a 45 minute drive away from home so it's a long way for us - it's a lot of driving for me, it's about four hours a day commute really.Interviewer:  Yeah,P16:  And what sorts of things, other than school, have been working well, right now? - Oor  maybe in the past - that have made things easier?Err, what therapy-wise or everything?Interviewer:  Yeah - therapy wise, or, you know, anything reallyP16:  The first therapy we did with Emma was a therapy down in Devon, it's called 'Snowdrop' it was started by a guy called Andrew who's son Daniel sadly died when he was 15 years old. It's a neurodevelopment therapy so it works on the connections in the brain and the fact that they can create new pathways - it's repetitive sort of therapy. When  Emma was a baby a lot of her responses and a lot of her reflexes were prenatal and have not progressed to outside the womb basically - she didn't really respond to loud noises, she didn't respond to touch on her skin, she was hypersensitive on her feet and hands, she didn't like bright light... there was loads and loads and loads of stuff, it was shocking and erm, it sounds barbaric, but one of the exercises, we would gently pinprick her skin on her arms and legs and after about 5 months one day she cried and we realised she could feel sensations on her body. We used to put her in a dark room with a torch and get her to track the light and that enabled her to be able to focus better and stop going so cross-eyed... so loads of really great interesting stuff, but it sort of just... woke her up, if you like? [Interview right yeah. Yeah.]And we still do the Snowdrop, not as regularly, but every sort of 9 months and the light sensory stuff and we took her to Brainwave for a couple of years, that's physiotherapy, but to be fair, although it's a great support - it's a great centre there, in Bridgewater - Emma wasn't - and probably still isn't, really - that able to do that much physiotherapy because her reflexes and senses are still so retained, it's not really her choice. Like she's not really at the stage to be doing much physio. She does do a physiotherapy programme but not an intense one like that. And then more recently... we have a cold laser at home which is purely working on her reflexes and that is working, erm, on, like, acupuncture points. And that's a programme from America - and it's called the QRI laser - and that's brilliant, it's so easy to use, and the laser is such a good bit of kit - you can use it on aching bones, arthritis, migraines... [information removed]... I swear that had we not done these extra therapies she'd still be very locked in and very unaware. She's very open now, she's very aware. If someone opens the front door - she never misses a trick to be honest - and her seat is facing backwards from the front door she will lean forward and turn right round in her chair. You know she's so nosy! So that's the therapies that work, we've also - it's like my full setup - so Emma has regular rowing therapy which is really good for her, sort of for her muscles and for tightness... multivitamins,you know all of her foods, I cook fresh, organic, we cook fish, so we just try and control all the things we can because there's lots of things we can't control - just trying to keep her healthy really. And we've got her buggy and we've got dogs, so we take walks with her. We used to have, up until she was about 5, we used to have a sling so I could carry her - just really trying to get her out as much as possible because it does get harder, you know, the bigger she gets. it does get harderSo for us I just think it's really important to just try and... just try and lead as normal a life as possible - be a normal a family with a disabled child, not the other way around, not a disabled family, you know? [Interviewer: Yeah, no, yeah] so we just try and move forwards really...No, no - definitely. Um, is there anything you wish you had known early on that you think could have been helpful?Loads. Loads. So - I wish someone had sat us down and told us how serious the situation was.Interviewer:  Yep.P16:  Because we did not have a clue. We were so naive. I remember them telling me that she was just a bit delayed and that she could walk and talk one day. And I look back now - especially having had another child - and I just think, ach, that was so obvious?! But I just wish.... you know, yes it's hard, yes it's been very difficult to deal with, but I just feel a lot of the therapies we have done with her which have had a massive impact, had they been done at 3 months old, 4 months old - they would have had a huge impact and they would have saved her a horrific couple of years - because she used to be awake four days on the trot, and then she'd sleep four days, so [partner's name] had a nervous breakdown, had to take time off work and we had a small baby,  a newborn baby and at times... it was like she was possessed by the devil because she'd been awake for so many days she was really... mad, you know? It was almost like she had mental health problems and then when she did finally go to sleep she would sleep for hours on end because she was exhausted.And you know, that's when we started looking for alternative therapies because and they helped so much - but had we known...You know, if someone had said 'the way your daughter is demented, there's a very good chance that she's going to have severe difficulties' - for someone to say that to us, would have been, just, massive. So more information maybe from actually just the medical profession early on?Yeah, definitely, I mean early on, we had nobody to turn to. We had a health visitor and we had physiotherapists, well, actually, that was later at like 14, 15, maybe 18 months old. The health visitor couldn't understand it, she was on a low weight percentile, I now realise that she wasn't actually able to take milk properly - I was expressing but she was just taking an ounce so she was probably starving that's why she screamed so much and I just think really, these should have been red-flags and just to have somebody to turn to, to be able to talk to, I think, and help you through those first couple of years would have ... they were hideous, I wouldn't wish that on my worst enemy... that's why I think life is so good now. Because it is [emphasis] good now, it's easy, we've accepted where we're at - we know her limitations, we're hoping that she might exceed some of them but back then...To be honest we thought she was gonna die. We constantly thought she was going to die. We knew no different. So, support, support, support. The more I think about it the more I think that's what people with preterm babies need. And I appreciate that some do fine and some go on to achieve great things, but I look back at Emma's skeletal formation, you know, the way she held herself at 6 or 7 months oldHer skin colouring, the way she screamed, you know - she didn't even have a normal climb, you know? She couldn't climb on things, her gag-reflex - so everytime we tried to giver her medicine she would choke - you know...All these things were building up, you know, quite a strong picture of... serious difficulties... and nobody was able to - whether people knew and didn't tell us - or whether they didn't know. But it would have made such difference from our side - to know, you know, that what we were dealing with was serious. You know?Interviewer:  Yeah.P16:  I remember coming out of - she had her first brain scan at about 13 months old, and I was pregnant with [name of second child] and I remember looking at [husband's name] crying, and saying: 'They think there's something wrong with her, don't they?'And he said  "I think you need to accept that this could be something serious"And I said "they think she's got brain damage" and [husband's name] said: "Yes I think that's what they think."Interviewer:  YeahP16:  Yeah, we - we still tried to guess what might be wrong with her, you know?Interviewer:  So still in the dark a bit?P16:  Totally in the dark. It was just awful, awful, we didn't have a clue about the severity - and then when we got the scan results backAnd we found that Emma had had a clear brain scan and we were just over the moon and so grateful and now we could all move on with our lives, you know, we thought that was it!Because, you know? And actually that was just the beginningSo yeah just a - a more open and honest dialogue and support to parents with young babies and children - I appreciate, you know, that we wouldn't have gotten this diagnosis, I appreciate that, but just to know that you are in a serious situation that is gonna be life changing.Interviewer:  Yeah, do you think you'd have benefited from receiving a diagnosis Emma's genetic disposition early on with a kind of a list of likely progressions and things? Do you think you'd have benefited from it?P16:  Yes definitely. Definitely. Erm, I mean thank God for the internetI mean before Emma was born we didn't really have the internet at home, I mean I used it at work, that's it, we didn't have the internet at home or anything like that. And I remember quite quickly, getting the internet at home because we knew that that was our only way of finding things out and thank God for the support group I think - I think Emma was about 2 when we found this one.And I found out about Rett syndrome when Emma was about 15 months old and I was convinced that that was what she had and up until then, and then in the end I had a feeling that I should get her tested for it and it took so long, months and months and months and when it came back negative I just couldn't believe it because everything that she was doing was just so typical of a child with Rett syndrome  - the regression, the screaming, the wringing of her hands - and so with the internet... we often say, like for parents with kids like this who don't have the internet, you can't imagine how isolating it must be for them...Interviewer:  You use the word isolating there. I'm wondering if, because Emma's symptoms were presenting a lot like Rett syndrome... and there's actually quite a big Rett Syndrome community... and whether you think that sense of community is helpful for things like this, because of access to support and shared experience...P16:  Yeah, yeah. The good thing about the Rett community especially on the support groups like Facebook is that they're quite active? So you will post something and you'll get a response quite quickly. Likewise there's quite a lot of stuff to read - you know I tend to read it all even if it's not relevant to Emma right now and I always say, whenever I post something, you know 'my daughter does not have Rett syndrome' a Rent-Like syndrome that presents very similar. The community for Rett is so unjudgemental ... there's obviously the support group for this syndrome but it's not very active because it's so rare and it's mainly epilepsy focused which, touch wood, is not us...Interviewer:  That's it from my questions. Is there anything that you want to talk about in more detail?P16:  I don't think so. I just think, anything that's found, anything that's new, that it could be sent back to us somehow...And the only other thing - if stuff could be fed back to us, and if there are any families near to us becauseit would be great to meet up with them, because um, I've got a friend in America who's daughter's got epilepsy and she's not quite like Emma but we've sort of formed a friendship but it's a long way away, it'd be nice to have a sort of family near us to chat to reallyInterviewer:  No, yeah, Definitely. Yeah.P16:  Sorry the audio has gone all crackly.Interviewer:  No, thank you. Thank you so much for your time, Sarah. [P16: No problem - thank you] And everything you said has been really really valuable and it's so lovely to have such engagement and such enthusiasm.P16:  It's nice to have an opportunity to talk about it in a, you know, in a full circle - you know, the highs and the lows.Interviewer: I'll send you an email which is just like debrief sheet but I'm always here if you want to contact me, if you have any more questions or anything. P16:Alright thank you, Eleanor nice to talk to you. Bye, bye.