Original transcriptInterviewer:  Okay, great. So we'll start with me understanding a bit more about your daughter. What's her name?P22:  Alexis.Interviewer:  Alexis. And how old is Alexis at the moment?P22:  She's 13.Interviewer:  She's 13. And when was she diagnosed with EEF1A2?P22:  She was eight.Interviewer:  She was eight, Ok. Can you tell me a bit about your experience of getting that diagnosis?P22:  Well, yeah, we had done [clears throat] excuse me, all, you know, all the testing that we could do up until that point, um, it was a fight to get the final diagnosis… I really wasn't expecting the test, the exome- sequencing to give us an answer. But, um, but it did. And that was good. Although there's not a lot of information. You know, it's nice to have some sort of answer, even though there's still a lot of questions, things that can't be answered.Interviewer:  So what was it like before with the not knowing?P22:  Um, it was hard when she was young. Because no one really had any idea and seizures were very bad, you know, not knowing if it was something that would get worse. But really it was just that… not knowing... that was worse for me, anyway.Interviewer:  And, I know it's difficult to guess. But, um, what do you think the impact of having that diagnosis has had? has your life changed since receiving that diagnosis?P22:  Um, I think that's just sort of, like a peace of mind, finally having an answer, I mean. I mean, you know, nothing's really changed. She’s still, you know, yeah, exactly like she was before, but you know, we have another child, so it's nice to have some idea for him, you know, where you're dealing with, you know, some sort of idea that, you know, this isn't something that should get worse, that sort of thing. Seeing Clara [genetic counsellor] has been the biggest help. She took the time to explain everything to my partner and me in detail, how rare this is, how few of us there are. It was validating to have someone finally believe us and not pass us on to someone else.Interviewer:  Ok, and a bit more about Alexis: what she like, in terms of her personality?P22:  [Sighs] Um, Alexis is, um, I think one of the more involved children with this diagnosis, she's, she's um, profoundly disabled. So she doesn't talk. But she is very, she's very, um, sort of laid back. Like she, she doesn't really get upset a lot. She's pretty, you know, content most of the time, there are things that she enjoys. And, you know, you can tell when she likes something... sometimes [Pause].Interviewer:  And could you give me an example of what a good day is, like, for you and Alexis?P22:  You mean, like a whole day kind of thing? Like...Interviewer:  I just mean, like, a particular moment, maybe in the last month or so, that has been really nice, sort of, so we can have a comparison of what is difficult, and what like a good day is like, versus what a difficult day is like, if that makes sense.P22:  OK. Well. It's hard to think of something specific. But when she has a good day, she's a very alert and paying a lot of attention to the smallest of things – she loves to be outside, she can be fascinated by nature. So, you know, you take her out, and she's all, you know, looking around and paying attention to what's going on and um.... [pause]... um....Interviewer:  Yeah, so alert and sort of engaged is when she's having a good day?P22:  Yeah, mhm. That's a good word. Interviewer:  And in comparison, what do you find the most difficult?P22:  Well, when the seizures are bad that we have, you know, it's hard for her to stay awake. And, you know, and she's just not really, you know... engaged... in interacting with other people...Interviewer:  And how do you feel when she's having a seizure?P22:  Well, I mean, it's, it's, you know, it's difficult, it's, she has seizures every day. So, it's not, you know, it's sort of normal but, you know, you hate to see it happen and they, they uh, her seizures are short, but then, you know, it may make her sleep for an hour, you know, she misses a lot of time and takes a little while to, you know, feel good again, after that...Interviewer:  What sort of support are you getting at the moment? From, from friends or family or from the school at the moment?P22:  She goes to school full time, she has nurses who go to school with her and we have some nurses who come at night, take care of her at night. Now, I mean, we have, I have friends who have children to have similar issues. So there's a lot of support there. And my family is, you know, they're accepting and supportive. There's just not a lot that they can, you know, really do to help. But...Interviewer:  Can you tell me about what kinds of things have, either now or in the past made life a bit easier, and whether that be therapies or particular interventions that you've put in place...P22:  Um, I don't know about making life easier.... I mean, she needs equipment, she's not mobile or anything, so having the right, you know, equipment for her makes a difference [Interviewer: Yeah] and you know, we've done lots of therapies, she gets everything at school now, and she loves school. So school is a huge part of our life. We've done things like aquatic therapy before, which she enjoys, but I'm not sure you know, how beneficial it is, you know, as far as progress...Interviewer:  Is there anything that you wish you'd known about sooner? Or is there anything that you would like parents in the future to know? Or to have access to?P22:  Not really, I can't think of anything, um, no. I think it's just important for parents to have support, even if it's not the exact same diagnosis and increased awareness of EEF1A2 would really help here. With this diagnosis, there's a pretty wide range of what you see. So, you know, there's lots of kids who can do a lot more than Alexis, who have this gene affected. So it's kind of, but otherwise, I don't, I mean, I feel like we had, you know, she started therapy when she was a baby. And, you know, once the seizures started, that we knew something was going on... And, you know, I can't think of anything that, you know, we didn't have that I wish that we had.Interviewer:  Yeah. Okay. That's actually the bulk of my questions done. So, is there anything that you'd like to expand on or any aspect of your experience that you'd like to add? Or any questions for me?P22:  Not really. I mean, I try to stay in touch with Cathy to find out, you know, what, what's happening on the research and of things...with Alexis a lot is based on disability. So, you know, we, we have very little communication and she physically can't really do things for herself. So a lot of those things, you know, affect our day to day lives a lot, they're not things that everyone, you know, deals with, with the same diagnosis. But so, I don't know, I mean, I can't really think of anything else...Interviewer:  That's fine, if you if you want to follow me out with any questions, you can always email me and this has been really useful and it's really nice to get a kind of human perspective on things to add to kind of more qualitative data, if that makes sense.P22:  Yes, definitely.Interviewer:  it's been really nice for me to hear the accounts of different families and to think about ways in which awareness and support could be given to the community. So and yeah, thank you a lot for your time.Yeah. Okay, I'll say Goodbye then, Susan.P22:  Okay, great. Thank you very much.Interviewer:  Thank you too. Bye.P22:  Okay. Bye bye.