Original transcriptInterviewer:  Ok I'm going to turn on the audio-recorder now.P05: Ok.Interviewer:  You'll have to give me a minute because I'm a complete luddite when it comes to technology. Ok, that's all going ahead. Ok. So we'll start with me understanding a bit more about - is it your son?P05:  (It is, yes)Interviewer:  Ok. And what's his name?P05:  His name is Jack.Interviewer:  Jack. Is it Ok if I call him Jack throughout this?P05:  Yeah, of course, that's fine.Interviewer:  (I know that's weird question!)And how old is Jack at the moment?P05:  He is fourteen.Interviewer:  And can you tell me when he was diagnosed with EEF1A2?P05:  I think he was [voice quavers] twelve years oldInterviewer:  Ok. And can you tell me a bit about the impact of receiving a definitive.... sort of 'name' for what was going on?P05:  It was extremely exciting. It was a bit of er, erm, you know, a string of numbers, it was hard to remember. And I had to keep, kind of, writing it down and reminding myself because it was not, you know, it was obviously, erm, a kind of strange ... name... for a condition, if you like, and, but no, just delighted to, um, find that there was - that they could pinpoint it to a certain, um, condition and that there was potential that we might find other people in the same situation.     Um. And so, you know, we instantly went to googling and searching, to see what we could find, and came across Cathy's website [eef1a2@wordpress.co.uk] fairly quickly, which was great. Um, and then was put in touch with the Facebook group, which is amazing. It was quite early days, then there's only a handful of children, erm, who had who had found each other or parents who had found each other at that point. So, um, yeah - it was... exciting.Interviewer:  Yeah. Because Jack was, erm, did you originally get a diagnosis of epilepsy?P05:  Yes. He was diagnosed with epilepsy when he was around - I can't, um, I'm probably wrong with my facts - but I think around about 18 months? Two years? Something like that. I can't remember precisely, I should have all these facts. Yeah, he was, he was pre-school... when he started having drop-seizures. Um...Interviewer:  And did you feel like receiving a diagnosis changed your perspective on what was going on with Jack?P05:  [Pause]Interviewer:  [Re-questioning] Did it, you know, you talk about it being kind of exciting because you've got all of this sort of information (or lack of as is) [P05: Yeah, yeah] but how did it feel? Having, kind of .... more of an answer than what was previously kind of a bit unknown?P05:  Well, I mean, epilepsy was... it was a definite thing for you could... treat and, um, you know, it took a while to get the right kind of medication, but that was well controlled, or has been well-controlled for a long time… the uncertainty surrounding learning difficulties, that was harder to come to terms with.So even though epilepsy is a major part of his diagnosis, in actual fact, it was one of the things that we were the least worried about, since we managed to control that with drugs, no it was the - the ... unknown of his developmental delays, you know... not knowing what the potential was, what he may achieve, what he might not achieve, what his health problems might be....Um, and so those are the things that were a worry [voice quavers]. And even though we found the group [EEF1A2 support group] and we don't [nervous laughter] mind.... and it turns out... (originally I mean, I think that's changing now) but Jack was the oldest...[Interviewer:: Yeah] I was expecting to find people older and were the eldest... and you know, it was [takes in breath] nice for me to be able to... pass on some of that experience. But then, you also could see that there was massive... spectrum on the on the range of, um, difficulties... so lots of the children that were on the Facebook group, we first joined had much more severe difficulties with epilepsy for example, so, um, it was hard to see sometimes... how our experiences might help them even though they were younger because we had very different experiences, if that make sense? [Interviewer: yeah] there was, um, some, some crossover and, erm, I think we were all able to help a little bit and, um, but yeah... P05:  I don't know if that answered your question...Interviewer:  No no, that was perfect.Interviewer:  So you talked there about... kind of 'the unknown' [P05:  Yeah]Could you expand a bit more on what you mean about that?P05:  Um, well Jack didn't walk till he was about... almost six. So... prior to that, we didn't think he ever would so when he gradually, um, obtained certain 'benchmarks' or, you know, certain developmental um... 'stages', you know, you begin to see that some things are possible and to just keep working and see what else is possible... but you, but you're not sure and - language is the main thing it looks... like it's probably unlikely that he will speak and he's... non verbal, still, at fourteen.... but it does seem that there are some children with the diagnosis who have some level of speech, so [sniffs]... who knows... But we just keep working at it. Yeah, but um, but yes, I think when he was, um, littler, if someone had said "he will never speak" or "he will speak" I think he would have (I don't know what difference it would have made but) um, it, everything was, was unknown... and everything's possible, you know?Interviewer:  yeah, yeah. And I suppose, um, your perspective and things shifts as time goes on, is there, um, can you remember a particular time when everything felt sort of overwhelming? Was there a particular point whether just due to circumstance of different factors in your life and different access to support where things were really difficult?P05:  [laughing] it goes... in goes in waves.[now more upset] Um.... it's difficult to say... I feel quite overwhelmed [half laughing / crying] currently... Erm, but that's not necessarily solely to do the diagnosis it's about erm... lifestyle and... you know it does, it does, impact... on your lifestyle.... and you try and adjust your lifestyle to, to, um, make the life as easy as possible but it's... difficult... [Pause]Interviewer:  [Gently] Yeah, yeah [waiting]P05:  so I'm currently finding [intake of breath] ... because I work, I'm, I'm wishing... I didn't [voice hitches] basically [sniffs] but I actually can't... not work ... that's my current [struggling] feeling of being overwhelmed and that's [sniffs] happened more recently, simply because the older Jack gets the more I've... the more support I feel he needs to reach his potential, if you like... [Interviewer: Yeah] So it's not that he's... things have changed but I [getting emotional] I feel like I'm not doing enough. But I can't change my [sniffs]...erm [pauses] you know, domestic setup, the arrangement we have with our work and stuff, we've, we've... established... to, to be flexible [Interviewer: yeah] but it doesn't mean we have very much money [sniffs] to be able to say, to able to just give up work, so...Interviewer:  [Gently] Can I just say? You said there - about feeling like you're not doing... enough. It sounds like you're doing an awesome amount, you know? [P05: relieved, laughs] sounds like you're doing terrifically well, in terms of the support you're providing, just, you know, I can see just from your survey responses alone, the kind of, you know, the kind of care you're showing.P05:  [sniffs] I know but... there's always [laughing] you can always think of more that you could be doing. It's fine, we get, we do get a huge amount of support from school ... and, we do, we're very fortunate in, erm, respite-support. So it's not that we don't have that support. But [sniffs]Interviewer:  But there's a big financial burden?P05:  Yeah....but it's not even just the financial side. It's just, just, my brain. Because... what we do... we're both [job information], and we work from home, and that's a lot of it is deadline based, so sometimes work takes priority when it... with everything else going on it shouldn't... but it has to. [Pause] And I would like Jack to be (emphasis) the priority more (emphasis) and work less so that's all [sniffs] but I don't think he's  been neglected or anything you know, we're doing alright, but I just... there's more that I could do to help him with his communication and to help him with his personal skills [sniffs] erm, so I'm frustrated about that...Interviewer:  So... there's like a time burden as well as a financial burden?P05:  [Breathes] Yes, I think it's time more so really... there's not enough hours in the day to do everythingYou know, we're not in poverty-stricken, we've got a nice house, and, you know, he's got, you know, he's got everything he needs. It's not that it's [sniffs] but it's... the time I would like to free up would mean not working... and that would be... practical. So...Interviewer:  Yeah. And you talk about wanting to kind of sort of, um, and you're working as a [job information] - do you always work from home? [P05: Yes, yeah.] And so you're based presumably with Jack, but what sort of support... do you get any support from friends and family? And what sort of support really do you think you need? (We're talking here if money and things, you know, weren't really an object)P05:  Yeah, well, friends and family - we moved to [location information] before we had Jack [sniffs] which is, um, not miles away, but it's a couple of hours drive from either of our families so his cousins or extended family and because he doesn't have any siblings, I think he's really missed out from that point of view. And, and so we do see them and they're really fond of him that they don't have that kind of relationship of that kind of every day-ness, of it being normal to rub along with other kids so... [intake of breath] So they are very supportive but then on a daily basis, we don't have really any support from family, my mum, [personal information] she can't walk very well at all. So just know she can't physically help at all. Interviewer:  Are you looking after her as well?P05:  I'm not her carer. She has paid-carers that come up several times a week. But [laughs] I look out for her, if you see what I mean? And she looked out for me too. So she, on a regular basis, If not every day, but every other day, she will come down for a couple of hours when it's key time getting ready for bed so she - so it's company for Jack; they've got a good relationship. But she can't, she couldn't, stop him doing anything. You know. So I can't leave them on their own. Because she's not physically able to ... cope with him. But he is... he benefits from her company. And she can keep an eye on in while I'm in the kitchen and shout if there's a problem. So it is support, she does offer support but it's... there's nobody. Nobody that we can lead Jack in the care of.Interviewer:  Right. Yes, yeah. So, erm, can you tell me a bit more about Jack Himself. And like what his personality is like?P05:  He is erm, the most [laughs] overriding things is he's extremely, extremely strong-willed and knows his own mind, absolutely. And um, he's very friendly and he's very sociable. And the world revolves around him and what he needs right now. And so while that is going well, it's brilliant; but when it's not going well he can get extremely distressed and and you know, display tangent behavior. And it's not always - you can't always anticipate what might upset him or you can't always allow him to do the thing that he wants to do a certain, given time so it's um, it's a regular thing, of just trying to... manage thatInterviewer:  A regular balancing act?P05:  yeahInterviewer:  So could you give an example of what, you know, let's say in the last week, what a particularly good day was and then an example of what a particularly difficult issue that came up was? [P05: [pause]] it doesn't have to be last week, but just sort of something that still sticks in mind.P05:  Er, well, the worst [laughing] the worst scenario wasn't recently at all. But it was supposed to be doing something which Jack loves to do, which backfired badly [more laughter] which was, um, he loves transport of all kinds and so traveling on buses and cars on trains. That's his, one of his, favourite things to do, doesn't matter where you're going, it's the being on the vehicle that he enjoys [sniffs] and we took him because we're in [location information] so there's little mini railway and so we went with my mother and my dad - they're not together, but he thinks that they're their friends and all that, and my mum's in a wheelchair so my dad was pushing my mum in a wheelchair and I was pushing Jack[aside] (when we're out and about Jack travels in a wheelchair - I could not manage with him on foot, even though he can walk. It's from a, from a behaviour-management point of view and from him getting tired, but yeah, so when we're out he uses a wheelchair)And we all got on the train and, um, we had to sit at different ends of the train because we, um, it was quite busy and you leave the wheelchairs at the station and get on. And so the journey there was fine and we sat with the driver and Jack was excited and very happy and then on the return trip we decided to move to be near my mum and dad, who said we could travel together in the same carriage, which we did. But because it had it open sides, the carriage what we went with on the way home, and it was very busy there were other people (not in our family) sat opposite, who I warned that Jack may be noisy or you know move around and just bear with us, and they said "oh no that's fine, of course!" and and then the train started moving and Jack started poking his legs outside of the train - which is dangerous [laughs] but we couldn't move position because it was too crowded so... [upset] I had to hold on to his legs to stop him [takes in breath] poking it out and so he had a meltdown and was trying to, you know, attack me and - he just didn't want to be held.So it wasn't [struggling to speak] he was enjoying the train- and if I let him as stick his leg out he would have been happy [sniffs] but I couldn't [laughs] because it was dangerous... so [sniffs] he ended up kind of fighting with me and fighting it kicking out the people in the train opposite - nobody could move out the way - until we got to the other end.... so that's an example of something designed to be... something you would enjoy and then a practical... physical reason... that I had to put him in a position he did not want to be in ... and he couldn't cope with it...So, that's the kind of scenario that happens often ... [breathes] Interviewer:  [Gently] Quite unexpected... and not something that you really plan for in advance.P05:  [laughing while talking] Well I did plan for it in as much that I won't get on the same train again now! But, yeah, I mean, if it had been an empty train and they'd had doors that closed that problem wouldn't have happened. But... [sighs] now I know. So... yeah. With the meltdowns, you begin to know the triggers. So you end up planning everything in as much fine detail as possible to avoid those kind of situations - and a lot of the time you manage it – sometimes, you can't predict what will make him upset. And you can’t console him when it happensInterviewer:  I noticed when you when you talked about that (And thank you, by the way, for - I know this is a really,  you know, this is your daily life, so it's not like you're not used talking and sharing about this - but it is incredibly personal. And I just - I'm incredibly grateful for you to be sharing this with me).P05:  [Breathes out] - thank you.Interviewer:  I think it's really important in the context of those other people on the train about raising awareness for what it's like looking after someone [P05: Yes] with a condition like this and you know, the potentials they have, but also the difficulties that they struggle with and the difficulties that they caused the people that love them [P05: [deep sigh] yeah]Interviewer:  [Back to questions] and when you were talking about other people on this journey... What would you say, sort of in general, about other people's reactions to Jack? So not you and your and your partner, but people that don't know Jack...P05:  [Sighs] some people are curious because he cries quite a lot, so he can be quite noisy. Sometimes... they think it's in endearing... Sometimes it's irritating... um, erm, children in particular... [laughs] can't help their responses. So they have stare a lot. Not because he looks unusual, but he's usually holding something unusual and playing with it... and chewing a toy or you know - and he's 14 year old boy, so it's like, "why is he doing that?" / "What's he holding?" / "Why is he making that noise?" / " Why is he dribbling?"Dribbling is a huge thing for kids. That's the thing they can't deal with the most I've found. So if you go to the playground...  which you do when you're feeling brave [chuckles] - he loves going on the roundabout which is kind of a communal thing, so if he's on there other children will jump on there without thinking and they'll gradually notice that he's... not like them... usually because he's screaming with delight, or dribbling, or wringing his hands or... doing something which they see is different to them. And sometimes they'll jump off and run away [laughing] and sometimes they'll stare at him and sometimes they will ask me questions and when they ask me questions, I can explain, and then they're usually very good.But most children don't have much experience of.... [pause] non-mainstream children unless they've got a family member or something to say it's hard to explain, you know, sometimes I say "This is Jack. He can't speak but he can understand. So don't not talk to him, but if he doesn't react it's because he can't speak -but he doesn't understand you" and they'll say "why he can't he speak - because he makes a lot of noise" and things like... that I can't really explain but, well, it opens the conversation and then they have empathy and they put themselves in that position and it changes it and then they're more receptive.But then if he's dribbling and wants to hold their hand that's a social step too far from them often [laughing] ... it's because they don't want to appear like they're disgusted but they are disgusted, if that makes sense, so...Interviewer:  You talk about the perspective of children there which is really interesting because I think children often come from a position, like you said, of complete, unabandoned curiosity [P05: Yeah] so people will stare and things like that but there's there's no kind of malice behind it or anything it's just complete... unfiltered curiosity [P05: Yeah] So how do, say, children's parents react differently? Those people on the train, in that example-P05:  I felt sorry for the people on the train because they were on holiday and having a nice day out and they were being "Oh no it's fine dear, you have a disabled child no problem" but when he was literally kicking and there was nowhere they could go and she [the woman on the train opposite] was quite old I think they wish... I think they were shocked to be honest. So. But that was unusual... because usually I wouldn't allow Jack in a position where he has been such a long close physical proximity where that might happen now you know that hadn't happened before so I wouldn't do that again and so, er, sometimes,  if we're on the bus and public transport Jack's in his wheelchair he might want something to eat and if I haven't got it or don't want him to have it or something then he can get cross and lash out. And if he can get to me he'll get to me and if he can get to those around.. so I often have kind of use myself as a barrier to stop anyone else getting grabbed. So [sighs] in that situation you have people worrying about me because I'm getting distressed and saying "Can I help?" and me saying  "No - keep away!" [laughing now]P05:  Or people looking absolutely horrified like "why are they out in public? He shouldn't be out."P05:  So... [pause] but a lot of that I think is me reading into what I think they're thinking... and maybe I'm wrong a lot of the time. You know, I think I tend to feel very defensive and sometimes perhaps, I'm, you know, selling people short or maybe they're not as horrified as I think they are just... [quiet]Interviewer:  Well, maybe the word you used earlier is more appropriate, you used the word 'shock' earlier, I think maybe that's what people experience more than your projection of people being horrified. Maybe it's ... maybe it's shock.P05:  [Breathes out] yeah. You're probably right, yes.Interviewer:  And when when he said earlier about Jack enjoying transport - can you give me an example of, erm, because we've, we've got the perspective of what a really difficult... an example of where, you know, to all intents and purposes you were trying to do something that he normally loves doing [P05: yeah] and it massively backfired [P05: yeah [laughing]], in an unforeseen way... and so can you give me an example of a day where he really enjoyed something?P05: [Takes a moment] Ok...Are we thinking like a day-to day thing or...?Interviewer:  it can, it can be, um, I'm thinking more of an example rather than a specific day. So an example of like a journey you had recently or an activity he did that he got enjoyment from? You said he that screams with delight when he's excited about things...P05:  Yeah he really enjoys motion. He likes spinning around. Things like that. He, erm, Ok, what he loved the most recently was we went to [location information] and he went on the 'Gruffalo' ride and he's obsessed with the Gruffalo, he loves watching the Gruffalo. And he went on a trip to school in the summer and he's been a few times and he's always, you know, not entirely enjoyed it because he hasn't wanted to go on rides...  he likes looking at them, he likes watching them but yeah - not wanting to get on them. And he came back from [location information] and school you know this when they drop them off there's not a lot of time to go into detail about what happened because there's loads of kids in wheelchairs getting off so , you know, they hand over your child and they just said he had a lovely time...P05:  And on the way home Jack signed 'train' [pause, a sense of significance] and he made the sound which is [laughing a lot] I can't do it now! He just goes [impersonates Jack, snorting noises] he sort of blows through his nose and that's his - that's how he says 'Fox' - and the reason he says that for foxes is because on the 'Gruffalo' the Fox sneezes and so now if he does that he thinking about foxes. 'Cos foxes sneeze. So we've worked that out. So he came home and so I sent in his school book "Jack said 'Fox train'. Do you know what that means?" And they said "Oh yes he went on Gruffalo ride?" So I didn't know there was a Gruffalo ride so we took him there to have personal experience with this Gruffalo rides which he loves and he actually did love it and, because you have a queue jump thing, because you're disabled,  you didn't have to go in the long queue. There was still a queue and Jack had to come out the chair and stand and wait and he did so absolutely no problem whereas hanging around stuff is something he's not good at. And he probably would have normally wanted to stayed in his chair (he likes his wheelchair - it's a security thing)  if you say to Jack "do you want to come out?" he'll point to his belt like "No, I'm staying in here"P05:  But he jumped out and he wanted to get out, so he had a little queue and then he had to walk all the way through dark places and things that might made him wary, but he was familiar and he kind of leapt on to the Gruffalo ride, and he absolutely loved it [takes in breath]P05:  And so that was something of him, an example of him, trying something that he would have not wanted to do before and actually going on a ride that he would have been wary of. And then when we got there (because we've never been to [location information]) there's a big map on the wall. And we said "what do you want to do?" and he could find on this little map to Gruffalo ride, just by the picture.... so things like that, you know, he [emphasis] remembered; he knew exactly what he wanted to; he loved it. And he was able to communicate to us what it is that he wanted to do. So that was, you know, he had a brilliant day. So that was it a good example, we don't go to [location information] every day [laughing a lot] - but we do have we do have  nice experiences regularly! But I'm just finding it hard to think of an example, of a specific example.Interviewer:  I think that was a perfect example. And it's also an example that gives insight into how small things can help. So for example - a very simple thing - the queue jumping [P05: yeah] and if there were more measures like that in place, kind of more awareness [P05: yeah, yeah definitely] it would make day-to-day life just a lot easier because it doesn't hinder anyone else you know. But it makes a big difference for people like Jack...P05:  Yeah, definitely.Interviewer:  and and you talked about the school trip - what sort of support does Jack get at school?P05:  Also has one-to-one support, he's in a class of, I think, 8 children and there are four members of staff and some of the children in his class need less support than the others but Jack requires one to one all the time so he doesn't have an allocated one to one, but of the four members of staff, whatever is appropriate depending on the activity, he will be supported in doing that. So there's ... (emphasis) few things Jack can’t do independently.... just because he has no sense of danger..P05:  So for example, at home, he can walk up and down the stairs. But I still have stair-gates at the top and the bottom. And he can actually go up quite confidently to coming down. He is a bit apprehensive as to whether he can do it, but if he's playing with a toy, he will want to carry that toy... therefore he can't hold on to the banister, therefore he's not looking at where his feet are going so, you know, he's easily distracted. So he needs to be just kept an eye on. So some things he can do for himself. But you have to watch him because he might forget that he's going downstairs because 'I'm looking at my toy' and slip, you know.P05:  So - kind of level of support. And also in school it's just encouragement to stay focused on the task because Jack wants to do what Jack to do [Interviewer:: Yeah, yeah] and he is learning to cooperate and and focus but... he needs someone to help. Interviewer:  Do you think he likes interacting with other people his age?P05:  Yes, he does. Yeah. Yeah.Interviewer:  So school is a good thing for that side of things.P05:  Yeah, absolutely loves interacting, but equally, he's very good manipulating and organizing people to do his bidding [laughs] if you like, so the extent of - where people sit,  that's a big thing for him - like, he wants to arrange where everyone sits. So [pause] older people. And [pause] neurotypical people will cooperate and it's amazing, and we'll all change places but some children might not want to move where he wants to sit... and some people might not be able to move where he wants them to sit. So that's an example - he wants to engage with everyone, but only so long as they're happy to engage on the thing that he wants to do. Because he usually likes to steer his environment, if you like. [Interviewer:: Yeah], so he does like to join in with other kids, but often other kids are doing something he can't do, so he will want them to do the thing that he can do, if you see what I mean.Interviewer:  What sort of activities and things do you think Jack really benefits from when he's at school?P05:  Well I think we're really fortunate in that Jack's school, I would say, is very well equipped. And so he is able to swim in school, for example, they have erm, regular kind of, um, trips out into the community, and they have interaction with mainstream school. And so... I would say, We're fortunate in the, um, facilities available to him, if you like. And I think what's more difficult is not so much in school, but his activities outside of school, [Interviewer:: ah, I see] that he can access and, you know, doing activities, you know, there are, for example, you know, there's lots of societies for kids with Down syndrome to go play table tennis. So, you know, which they've got the kind of community of their own - I'm not, not suggesting that they're excluding people but that, that is in place [Interviewer:: no, exactly] and all those children have similar abilities or requirements. So, so the activities are appropriate,P05:  and lots of those activities actually wouldn't be appropriate for Jack, because he couldn't engage in a game of table tennis because he.... his coordination with not be right and he wouldn't understand the rules. But he would enjoy going and throwing ping pong balls. [Interviewer:: yeah, yeah] so if there's [laughing now] somewhere he can just go and throw balls around, with other kids who want to throw balls around, but to do an activity which is ... structured is difficult for him. And to access any kind of mainstream thing, well he would just not be able to engage and would be disruptive or, you know, he will be, he wouldn't be able to. And so there wouldn't be a social benefit, because he would be seen as a disruptive influence. This is me again, second guessing people's responses, but....P05:  So there are there are a couple of clubs which he does go to - and we're hoping he's going to go to more -which are more like a youth-club-type arrangement. And siblings who are not disabled go there also. So there's a mixture of kids and it's a much more free-flowing thing and there's stuff there for them to do or not do. And that's kind of thing, I think, which suits Jack....Interviewer:  ... A kind of supported environment where there's an element of awareness? [P05: [deep sigh] Yes. Yeah] because I get that, on a just a random day out, there just so many external factors, and also just a lack of awareness from other people [P05: Yes, yeah]. But when you gave the example of the Down syndrome-support groups, they're available. It would be nice if there were groups like that for conditions EEF1A2...P05:  [With emphasis] Definitely. There is support out there for kids with autism [Interviewer: Right. Yeah] and  because Jack has not got a diagnosis of autism we've never kind of investigated that.... but in actual fact, perhaps he does have autism, I don't know how that's defined, but a lot of his behaviors are 'autistic-like'...  but we don't quite fit into any... group...Interviewer:  And is there anything that you would like parents in the future to know or to have access to that you found particularly helpful?P05:  I think, I think, if I was given someone... if someone wrote down all the problems we would have when Jack was a baby would have been too much... too much... [louder, more with emphasis] But it's not too much. And he can deal with it. And he is amazing. And there's so much that you learn from them and your experience... it might not be the one you would have chosen but... I'm definitely... a different person and I think if things [laugher] are given as a list it may seem overwhelming - not say that they don't need that information - but also [deep breath] to see that there is hope and there is progress and you know, when Jack was a baby they didn't know if he would ever walk so you just assumed that he wouldn't and he did and some kids that have condition will some and some won't. But some will and some have some language and, you know so... we don't know what the percentages are, so we just keep working, keep working... and speech therapy and physiotherapy that Jack had, really quite early on, and they made a huge amount of difference and they also helped us plug into the support networks and social services which if... we hadn't had those...  too much is left for the parents to just find ... it's all word of mouth and you don't have [sniffs] a clear list of places to go for help and information - it's very piecemeal. I guess if they were a list of supported bodies and a list of useful therapists that have helped other kids - as positive steps that you can take... I guess that would be helpful...[….]Anyway, thank you ever so much for your time, I know I’ve rambled on…Interviewer:No, thank you, - I can't even believe you're thanking me now – thank you. It's just been really valuable and really important.P05:  [laughing] Who’s on at 12:30? Because they’re gonna be raging! [Interviewer:[laughing] No, no, don’t worry] OK, well thank you so ever so much… And yeah, keep in touch.Interviewer:Yeah, thank you, Amanda. I will email my answers your questions as best I can after I’ve had a meeting with [supervisor]. P05:Thank you very much. Alright then, see you later, bye. 